<?xml version='1.0'?>
<article>
<artheader>
  <title>Generating Slides From Topic Maps</title>
  <author><firstname>Robert</firstname><surname>Barta</surname></author>
  <affiliation>
    <address><email>rho@bond.edu.au</email></address>
  </affiliation>
  <copyright>
    <year>2002</year>
    <holder role="mailto:rho@bond.edu.au">Robert Barta</holder>
  </copyright>
  <abstract>
    <para>
       Slide shows are a frequent method to transport concepts to a live
       audience. Due to the limited space and the presence of a speaker
       slide shows typically contain topics, together with a short description
       and how they are related to other concepts. Exactly this kind of
       knowledge can also be denoted in <ulink url="http://www.topicmaps.org">Topic Maps</ulink>.
       This document describes the setup how slide shows can be generated
       from Topic Map-encoded knowledge using a SAX handler.
    </para>
</abstract>
</artheader>

<section><title>Motivation</title>
<para>
Topic Maps have been designed to hold flat knowledge. They can contain topics, their place in an ontology (type system),
some description and references. And they usually relationships between these topics.
</para>

<para>
As such, they have some similarity with slide shows with the exception that these documents are presented for a particular
purpose for a particular audience and for a particular presenter. Still, it seems inefficient to store flat knowledge
into a slide show if it already exists in Topic Maps.
</para>
</section>

<section><title>Overview</title>
  <para>
  Let us assume that we already have a number of Topic Maps and that these contain topics
  and concepts which we would like to map into a slide show. Obviously this process cannot
  be fully automated as 

  <itemizedlist>
    <listitem>slides have to appear in a specific order</listitem>
    <listitem>due to size limitations of a single slide, one specific topic has to be continued on the next slide
       </listitem>
    <listitem>for every particular topic maybe different information is relevant</listitem>
  </itemizedlist>

  The author of the slide show must specify <emphasis>what</emphasis> he wants, while the slide generator should
  fill in the required content from the pool of Topic Maps.
  </para>

  <para>
  In this light, the slide generator is a TM query engine which is used to extract the
  requested information. The query engine, though, will be specialized and tailored for the
  generation of slides.
  </para>

  <para>
  For obvious reasons the generated output is an XML language (called here SlideML) to allow 
  conversion into other XML languages. The conversion is thus controlled via namespaces:

   <variablelist><title>Involved Namespaces</title>
     <varlistentry>
	<term><literal>http://topicmaps.bond.edu.au/smile/1.0/</literal></term>
	<listitem>Elements from this namespace define <emphasis>what</emphasis> topic information
	    should be included for a particular topic. These elements will be detected in the intake
	    XML instance and will be interpreted.</listitem>
     </varlistentry>
     <varlistentry>
	<term><literal>http://topicmaps.bond.edu.au/SlideML/</literal></term>
	<listitem>Elements from this namespace may or may not be in the incoming document. They
	   will be passed transparently through the generator. In every generated slide elements
	   from this namespace will be used to structure topic information.</listitem>
     </varlistentry>
   </variablelist>

</para>

</section>

<section><title>The Intake</title>
<para>
The slide generator will first consult an incoming XML document about the modalities
of the slide show. To allow for a maximum of flexibility, the generator does only process
XML elements from the <literal>http://topicmaps.bond.edu.au/smile/1.0/</literal> namespace.
All other elements will be passed through transparently. This allows to use the <literal>smile</literal>
elements in any XML document whether this is now slide-oriented or not.
</para>

<section><title>The Smile Namespace</title>
<para>
Following incoming elements belong to the <literal>smile</literal> namespace and are detected
by the generator:

<variablelist><title>Smile Elements</title>
  <varlistentry>
     <term>slide</term>
     <listitem>This signals the begin of a slide.
  
       <itemizedlist>
       <listitem>The mandatory attribute is <literal>tid</literal>, which must contain a topic id. 
		 If this particular topic does not exist in the current topic map, an error is
		 flagged.</listitem>
       <listitem>Optionally, the attribute <literal>format</literal> can be used to control the content of
		 this slide.</listitem>
       </itemizedlist>
     </listitem>
  </varlistentry>
  <varlistentry>
     <term>default</term>
     <listitem>With this tag, default values can be set via attributes which apply to
	 all slides which may follow this tag:
  
	<itemizedlist>
	  <listitem>The value of the <literal>map</literal> attribute will be interpreted as tau expression according
		to the CPAN package XTM::Virtual.</listitem>
	  <listitem>The value of the <literal>format</literal> attribute will be used to control <emphasis>what</emphasis> 
	      every slide will contain from the topic in the topic map. This format can be overridden for every individual 
	      slide. Formats are described below.</listitem>
	</itemizedlist>
     </listitem>
  </varlistentry>

</variablelist>

</para>
</section>

<section><title>Formats</title>

<para>
A format string describes <emphasis>what</emphasis> exactly should be included in the generated slide.
The default format is

<programlisting>
  "%ti %ty %rd %ins %res"
</programlisting>

and takes care that a title, types, inlines (resourceData), instances and references (occurrences)
of that particular topic are included on a slide in that particular order.
</para>

<para>
One format specifier is introduced with a '%' character, several such specifiers are
separated bu one or more blanks. Following specifiers are honored:

<variablelist><title>Format Specifiers</title>
  <varlistentry>
     <term><literal>ti</literal></term>
     <listitem>Include a <literal>&lt;title></literal> tag containing the title of the slide. This is generated from
     the <emphasis>baseName</emphasis> of the topic. (Sorry, no scoping yet)</listitem>
  </varlistentry>

  <varlistentry>
     <term><literal>ty</literal> and <literal>tys</literal></term>
     <listitem>This includes the types (<emphasis>instanceOf</emphasis>, to be exact) of the topic enclosed by a 
         <literal>&lt;types></literal> tag. In case of <literal>ty</literal>, every <emphasis>instanceOf</emphasis>
         is embedded with its own <literal>&lt;type></literal> tag. In case of <literal>tys</literal> all these
         <emphasis>instanceOfs</emphasis> are concatenated to one string separated by ','.</listitem>
  </varlistentry>

  <varlistentry>
     <term><literal>rd</literal> and <literal>rds</literal></term>
     <listitem>This includes the <emphasis>resourceData</emphasis> occurrences enclosed by the tag 
               <literal>&lt;inlines></literal>. In case of <literal>rd</literal>, every such occurrence is 
               wrapped into its own tag, <literal>&lt;inline></literal>. In case of <literal>rds</literal>, 
               all strings are concatenated into one character string (again, separated by ',').</listitem>
  </varlistentry>

  <varlistentry>
     <term><literal>in</literal>, <literal>ins</literal>  and <literal>inrds</literal></term>
     <listitem>This includes the instances of this topic (i.e. all topic which have an appropriate
         <emphasis>instanceOf</emphasis> of this topic) using the tag <literal>&lt;instances></literal>. 
         In case of <literal>in</literal>, the individual instances are wrapped into separate 
         <literal>&lt;instance></literal> tags. In case of <literal>ins</literal>, they
         are concatenated via ',' into one string. <literal>inrds</literal> behaves like <literal>in</literal>
         except that for every individual instance also its <emphasis>resourceData</emphasis> is included via
         nested <literal>&lt;description></literal> tags.
     </listitem>
  </varlistentry>

  <varlistentry>
     <term><literal>res</literal></term>
     <listitem>This includes the resourceRef occurrences via a <literal>&lt;references></literal> tag. Every
               individual occurrence is included via a <literal>&lt;reference></literal> tag. This tag is empty,
               but contains an <literal>xlink:href</literal> attribute containing the reference link.
     </listitem>
  </varlistentry>
</variablelist>

</para>

<para>
Since most final slide formats have space limitations for slides, there is also a way to limit
the number of things which are added to a particular slide. A typical scenario is to start with a topic,
its explanation and the various instances of this topic. If that topic has too many of these instances
to fit onto a slide, then the remaining instances can be moved to a second slide:

<informalexample>
<programlisting><![CDATA[
  <!-- first two instances -->
  <astma:slide astma:tid="client-side-presentation-technology" astma:format="%ti %in[1-2]"/>

  <!-- same but as a followup slide, all other instances and with continue -->
  <astma:slide astma:tid="client-side-presentation-technology" astma:format="%ti %in[3-]" astma:continue="yes"/>

</slides>
]]></programlisting>
</informalexample>

Ranges are specified via a lower and an upper bound in <literal>[n-m]</literal>. If the lower bound is omitted,
<literal>1</literal> will be assumed. If the upper bound is omitted, then <literal>5</literal> is the default.
</para>

<para>
Following format specifiers can have a range modifier:

<itemizedlist>
  <listitem><literal>ty</literal> and <literal>tys</literal></listitem>
  <listitem><literal>rd</literal> and <literal>rds</literal></listitem>
  <listitem><literal>in</literal>, <literal>ins</literal>  and <literal>inrds</literal></listitem>
  <listitem><literal>res</literal></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</para>

</section>

</section>

<section><title>The Exhaust</title>
<para>
Once the slide generator has detected an element in the <literal>smile</literal> namespace,
it will retrieve the topic information from the backend Topic Map database. As result, the
generator will format this information into <literal>SlideML</literal> elements.
(You can find the DTD in the appendices.)
SlideML instances can then be converted into other formats (see Backends).
</para>

</section>

<section><title>Example</title>
<para>
Let us assume we had a topic map covering web programming in an <ulink url="http://topicmaps.bond.edu.au/astma/">AsTMa</ulink>
file called <filename>webprogramming.atm</filename>. A slide show can be defined via the following XML document:

<informalexample>
<programlisting><![CDATA[
<?xml version="1.0" standalone="yes"?>
<slides name="The Mystery Tour, 2002" 
	xmlns = "http://topicmaps.bond.edu.au/SlideML/"
        xmlns:astma = "http://topicmaps.bond.edu.au/astma/1.0/"
        xmlns:smile = "http://topicmaps.bond.edu.au/smile/1.0/">

  <institution>Bond University</institution>

  <astma:default astma:tau_expr="file:webprogramming.atm"/> <!-- this loads the map(s) -->

  <!-- first slide, no detailed specification, so the default format will be used -->
  <astma:slide astma:tid="web-programming"/>

  <!-- second slide, explicit format, first two instances -->
  <astma:slide astma:tid="client-side-presentation-technology" astma:format="%ti %in[1-2]"/>

  <!-- same but as a followup slide, all other instances -->
  <astma:slide astma:tid="client-side-presentation-technology" astma:format="%ti %in[3-]" astma:continue="yes"/>

</slides>
]]></programlisting>
</informalexample>

The generator will remove all <literal>astma:*</literal> elements and will produce (modulo formatting):

<informalexample>
<programlisting><![CDATA[
<slides name="The Mystery Tour, 2002" 
	xmlns = "http://topicmaps.bond.edu.au/SlideML/"
        xmlns:astma = "http://topicmaps.bond.edu.au/astma/1.0/"
        xmlns:smile = "http://topicmaps.bond.edu.au/smile/1.0/">

  <institution>Bond University</institution>

  <!-- first slide, no detailed specification, so the default format will be used -->
  <smile:slide smile:tid='web-programming'>
      <smile:title>web programming</smile:title>
      <smile:types>
         <smile:type>programming</smile:type>
      </smile:types>
      <smile:inlines>
         <smile:inline>web programming implements a particular application in a client/server scenario</smile:inline>
      </smile:inlines>
      <smile:instances>server side programming, client side programming</smile:instances>
      <smile:references />
   </smile:slide>
 
  <!-- second slide, explicit format, first three instances -->
  <smile:slide smile:tid='client-side-presentation-technology'>
      <smile:title>client-side presentation technology</smile:title>
      <smile:instances>
         <smile:instance>XHTML</smile:instance>
         <smile:instance>CSS, Cascading Style Sheets</smile:instance>
      </smile:instances>
  </smile:slide>
 
  <!-- same but as a followup slide, all other instances -->
  <smile:slide smile:tid='client-side-presentation-technology' smile:continue='yes'>
      <smile:title>client-side presentation technology</smile:title>
      <smile:instances>
         <smile:instance>HTML4</smile:instance>
         <smile:instance>Dynamic HTML</smile:instance>
      </smile:instances>
  </smile:slide> 

</slides>
]]></programlisting>
</informalexample>

This XML document can then postprocessed with various backends.
</para>
</section>

<section><title>The Distribution</title>

<para>
The distribution consists of a Perl binary <filename>stm2sml.pl</filename> which makes use of a
specific <ulink url="http://www.saxproject.org/">SAX processor</ulink> to perform the transformation. This
binary comes with its own documentation, but basically it is invoked like

<informalexample>
<programlisting>
  cat slidedefinition.stm | stm2sml.pl --urlbase=/where/are/topic/maps/ > slides.xml
</programlisting>
</informalexample>
</para>


<section><title>Backends</title>
<para>
Aside from transforming <literal>SlideML</literal> instances into other XML based slides presentations such as

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><ulink url="http://oeh.tu-graz.ac.at/prestimel/">Prestimel</ulink>, or</listitem>
<listitem><ulink url="http://www.cpan.org/authors/id/J/JS/JSTENZEL/PerlPoint-Package-0.35.readme">PerlPoint</ulink></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

these instances can also be converted into HTML and PDF (via 
<ulink url="http://www.ctan.org/">LaTeX</ulink> and 
<ulink url="http://prosper.sourceforge.net/">Prosper</ulink>) using the <filename>Makefile</filename> in
the <filename>backends</filename> directory. This file makes use of <literal>xsltproc</literal> which comes with the 
<ulink url="http://www.xmlsoft.org/XSLT.html"><literal>libxslt</literal> package</ulink>.
</para>

</section>

</section>


<appendix><title>Appendix: SlideML DTD</title>


<para>
<informalexample>
<programlisting><![CDATA[
<!ELEMENT slide     (title|types|inlines|instances|references)*>
<!ATTLIST slide     title CDATA #REQUIRED
                    topic CDATA #REQUIRED>

<!ELEMENT title     #PCDATA>

<!ELEMENT types     (type+|#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT type      #PCDATA>

<!ELEMENT inlines   (inline+|#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT inline    #PCDATA>

<!ELEMENT instances (instance+|#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT instance  (description|#PCDATA)>

<!ELEMENT references reference+>
<!ELEMENT reference EMPTY>
<!ATTLIST reference href  CDATA #REQUIRED
                    type  CDATA 'simple' #FIXED>

]
]]></programlisting>
</informalexample>
</para>
</appendix>
<!-- <bibliography> ... </bibliography> -->
</article>